the next time you pull up to the
drive-thru you may not know it but
you're part of a business model that's
fraught with turmoil the model's called
franchising and it's spreading maybe
you've heard the phrase fast food
franchise but do you really know what it
means or how it works you might be
surprised by how franchising is
affecting your community and the whole
economy we're talking way more than
Burgers and
[Music]
Fries on one side a company besides it
has a good thing going it wants to
expand but it doesn't want to run all
the new locations it's just not familiar
enough with those places it might be
short on money for the expansion and it
doesn't want to employ a bunch of local
workers and the company wants the person
in charge of each location to be someone
special someone with skin in the
[Music]
game on the other side is that special
person she wants to start a
business she knows the local market she
has some money to invest or can qualify
for a
loan but not enough to buy property fix
it up and buy all her equipment and
maybe not enough for much marketing she
might not know the industry very well
and would rather not go it
alone so the sides make a deal the
company gives its new franchisee what
she needs to hit the ground running she
takes the company's training course and
pays an initial fee for the
franchise
[Music]
the franchise model depends on a good
brand that means more than anything
consistency if it's fast food you'll see
the same thing at every drive-through
window cashiers wearing the same logo
menus offering the same food all
prepared in the same way the customers
remain loyal to the brand no matter
where they go what protects the brand is
is the franchise agreement the rules for
a franchisee might cover everything from
operating hours to where she buys
supplies the agreement also requires the
franchisee to pay royalties typically 5
to 10% of the location
sales but there's no guarantee the
franchise will flourish franchisees go
belly up about as often as unfranchised
owners still many franchisees manage to
hang on some do well even open other
locations
[Music]
the company and its franchisees don't
always see I to eye the company might
impose a higher royalty it might limit
any flexibility in finding supplies and
setting prices the franchise can start
to feel overburdened but if she doesn't
sign on and follow the rules the company
might take over the franchise she might
lose her
business for the company's part it has
reasons to write rules and enforce them
making all franchisees buy from the same
supplier can help bring down cost and
higher fees can fund more advertising
the company also wants its franchisees
to follow standard rules freeloading on
the brand is not
[Music]
allowed franchise employees the folks
who work behind the cash register let's
say they're not known for earning big
bucks but economists disagree about why
some blame the wages and work conditions
on the industries where franchising has
taken off where competition is Cutthroat
and the jobs are low skilled other
economists blame low wages on the
franchise model
[Music]
itself when a company franchises they
point out it's adding extra owners that
means more people taking slices of the
pie so there's more pressure to cut
costs like wages and this leaves less
money for the
workers there's another debate about
franchising how it affects the economy
one side claims the model has proven
itself more efficient that can mean
lower prices for consumers and more
consumption so more production and more
jobs the other side claims that
franchising leaves the workers with less
money for buying stuff and that means
less consumption less production and
fewer
jobs
we'll let the experts keep fighting
about that one thing is clear though
this way of doing business the franchise
model it's
spreading gas stations car dealerships
restaurants convenience stores hotels
eyewear retailers Tax Services child
care centers Legal Services news media
janitorial services Home Health Care dry
cleaners salons house painting it
support carpet cleaning Pet Supplies
Hardware store tutoring gyms real estate
printing long hair embroidery Services
play places sign stores battery stores
laundry mats coffee shops garage door
repair computer repair cell phone repair
ice cream shops sharing Services massage
services car rental Leak Detection
window cleaning plumbers Home Inspection
HVAC repair travel agencies
marketing